      







The letter A is the first letter in the Latin alphabet. Its name in English () is spelled ae; the plural is aes, though this is rare.

 History 
The letter A can be traced to a pictogram of an ox head in Egyptian hieroglyphs or the Proto-Sinaitic alphabet.

{| class"wikitable"
|- style"background-color:#EEEEEE; text-align:center;"
! Egyptian
! Proto-Semitic<br> ox's head
! Phoenician <br>aleph
! Greek <br>Alpha
! Etruscan <br>A
! Roman <br>A
|- style"background-color:white; text-align:center;"
|}

Circa 1600 B.C. the Phoenician alphabet's letter had a linear form that served as the base for some later forms. Its name must have corresponded closely to the Hebrew aleph.

{| cellspacing"10" cellpadding"0" style"background-color: white; float: right;"
|- align"center"
|Blackletter ABlackletter A 
|Uncial AUncial A
|}
When the Ancient Greeks adopted the alphabet, they had no use for the glottal stop that the letter had denoted in Phoenician and other Semitic languages, so they used the sign for the vowel , and kept its name with a minor change (alpha). In the earliest Greek inscriptions after the Greek Dark Ages, dating to the 8th century BC, the letter rests upon its side, but in the Greek alphabet of later times it generally resembles the modern capital letter, although many local varieties can be distinguished by the shortening of one leg, or by the angle at which the cross line is set.

The Etruscans brought the Greek alphabet to their civilization in the Italian Peninsula and left the letter unchanged. The Romans later adopted the Etruscan alphabet to write Latin, and the resulting letter was preserved in the modern Latin alphabet used to write many languages, including English.

Typographic variants include a double-story and single-story a.
The letter has two minuscule (lower-case) forms. The form used in most current handwriting, and in italic type, consists of a circle and vertical stroke (), called Latin alpha or "script a". Most printed material uses a form consisting of a small loop with an arc over it (). Both derive from the majuscule (capital) form. In Greek handwriting, it was common to join the left leg and horizontal stroke into a single loop, as demonstrated by the Uncial version shown. Many fonts then made the right leg vertical. In some of these, the serif that began the right leg stroke developed into an arc, resulting in the printed form, while in others it was dropped, resulting in the modern handwritten form.

 Usage 
In English, the letter "A" by itself usually denotes the near-open front unrounded vowel () as in pad, the open back unrounded vowel () as in father, or, in concert with a later orthographic vowel, the diphthong  as in ace and major, due to effects of the great vowel shift.  

In most other languages that use the Latin alphabet, the letter A denotes either an open back unrounded vowel (), or an open central unrounded vowel (). In the International Phonetic Alphabet, variants of the letter A denote various vowels. In X-SAMPA, capital A denotes the open back unrounded vowel and lowercase a denotes the open front unrounded vowel.

A is the third most common letter in English, and the second most common in Spanish and French. On average, about 8.2% of letters in English tend to be As, while the number is 6.2% in Spanish and 4% in French.

A is often used to denote something or someone of a better or more prestigious quality or status: A or A+, the best grade that can be assigned by teachers for students' schoolwork; A grade for clean restaurants; A-List celebrities, etc. The number 1 is used in a similar way.

A turned 'a' (ɐ) is used by the International Phonetic Alphabet for the near-open central vowel, while a turned capital 'A' (∀) is used in predicate logic to indicate universal quantification.



 Codes for computing 
In Unicode the capital A is codepoint U+0041 and the lower case a is U+0061.

The ASCII code for capital A is 65 and for lower case a is 97; or in binary 01000001 and 01100001, respectively.

The EBCDIC code for capital A is 193 and for lowercase a is 129.

The numeric character references in HTML and XML are "<tt>&amp;#65;</tt>" and "<tt>&amp;#97;</tt>" for upper and lower case, respectively.

 References 








af:A
als:A
ar:A
an:A
arc:A
ast:A
az:A
zh-min-nan:A
bar:A
bs:A
br:A (lizherenn)
bg:A
ca:A
cs:A
co:A
cy:A
da:A
de:A
dv:އޭ
et:A
el:A
eml:A
es:A
eo:A
eu:A
fa:A
fr:A (lettre)
fy:A
fur:A
gv:Aittyn
gd:A
gl:A
gan:A
ko:A
hr:A
io:A
ilo:A
id:A
ia:A
is:A
it:A
he:A
ka:A
kw:A
sw:A
ht:A
ku:A (herf)
la:A
lv:A
lb:A (Buschtaf)
lt:A
hu:A
mk:A (Латиница)
mg:A
ml:A
mzn:A
ms:A
nah:A
nl:A (letter)
ja:A
no:A
nn:A
nrm:A
uz:A (harf)
pl:A
pt:A
crh:A
ro:A
qu:A
ru:A (латиница)
se:A
stq:A
scn:A
simple:A
sk:A
sl:A
szl:A
srn:A
sr:A (слово латинице)
fi:A
sv:A
tl:A
th:A
tr:A (harf)
tk:A
uk:A (латиниця)
vi:A
vo:A
wuu:A
yi:A
yo:A
zh-yue:A
diq:A
bat-smg:A
zh:A
