      
Human heart and lungs, from an older edition of Gray's Anatomy.

Anatomy (from the Greek  anatomia, from   ana: separate, apart from, and temnein, to cut up, cut open) is a branch of biology and Medicine which studies primarily the internal structure and design of the structure of living things. It is a general term that includes human anatomy, animal anatomy (zootomy) and plant anatomy (phytotomy). Anatomy is divided into various sub specialties in some of its facets anatomy is closely related to Embryology, Histology, comparative anatomy and comparative embryology,<!--
--> through common roots in evolution.

Anatomy is subdivided into gross anatomy (or macroscopic anatomy) and microscopic anatomy. Gross anatomy (also called topographical anatomy, regional anatomy, or anthropotomy) is the study of anatomical structures that can be seen by unaided vision with the naked eye. Microscopic anatomy is the study of minute anatomical structures assisted with microscopes, which includes histology (the study of the organization of tissues), and cytology (the study of cells).

The history of anatomy has been characterized, over time, by a continually developing understanding of the functions of organs and structures in the body including the clinical understanding of how damage to these structures effects other functions in the body. Methods have also advanced dramatically, advancing from examination of animals through dissection of cadavers (dead human bodies) to technologically complex techniques developed in the 20th century including X-ray technology, Sonogram and MRI technology.

Anatomy should not be confused with anatomical pathology (also called morbid anatomy or histopathology), which is the study of the gross and microscopic appearances of diseased organs.

 Superficial anatomy 
Superficial anatomy or surface anatomy is important in anatomy being the study of anatomical landmarks that can be readily seen from the contours or the surface of the body. With knowledge of superficial anatomy, physicians or veterinary surgeons gauge the position and anatomy of the associated deeper structures.

 Human anatomy 

Para-sagittal MRI scan of the head
An X-ray of a human chest.

Human anatomy, including gross human anatomy and histology, is primarily the scientific study of the morphology of the adult human body.

Generally, students of certain biological sciences, paramedics, physiotherapists, occupational therapy, nurses, and medical students learn gross anatomy and microscopic anatomy from anatomical models, skeletons, textbooks, diagrams, photographs, lectures and tutorials. The study of microscopic anatomy (or histology) can be aided by practical experience examining histological preparations (or slides) under a microscope; and in addition, medical students generally also learn gross anatomy with practical experience of dissection and inspection of cadavers (dead human bodies).

Human anatomy, physiology and biochemistry are complementary basic medical sciences, which are generally taught to medical students in their first year at medical school. Human anatomy can be taught regionally or systemically; that is, respectively, studying anatomy by bodily regions such as the head and chest, or studying by specific systems, such as the nervous or respiratory systems. The major anatomy textbook, Gray's Anatomy, has recently been reorganized from a systems format to a regional format,<!--
--><!--
--> in line with modern teaching methods. A thorough working knowledge of anatomy is required by all medical doctors, especially surgeons, and doctors working in some diagnostic specialities, such as histopathology and radiology.

Academic human anatomists are usually employed by universities, medical schools or teaching hospitals. They are often involved in teaching anatomy, and research into certain systems, organs, tissues or cells.

 Other branches 
*Comparative anatomy relates to the comparison of anatomical structures (both gross and microscopic) in different animals.
*Anthropological anatomy or physical anthropology relates to the comparison of the anatomy of different races of humans.
*Artistic anatomy relates to anatomic studies for artistic reasons.

 See also 
General anatomy:
* Anatomical terms of location
* Body plan
* Foundational Model of Anatomy
* History of anatomy
* Important publications in anatomy
* List of anatomical topics
* Superficial anatomy

Human anatomy:
* List of human anatomical features
* List of human anatomical parts named after people

 Notes 


 References 
* 

 External links 


*  promotes anatomical sciences.
*  promotes anatomical information from Argentine anatomists.
* American Society of Exercise Physiologists
*  A society to promote communication among teachers of human anatomy and physiology in colleges, universities, and related institutions.
*  is an annual journal of clinical neuroanatomy.
*  is an annual journal of anatomical variations and clinical anatomy case reports.
* 
* 
* 
*  Interactive atlas of whole human body cross-sectional anatomy.
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
*  An Interactive Cross-Sectional Anatomy Atlas
* 
* 
* 
*  is a free study aid for must-know anatomy.
*  home page of the Dissection Team from Argentina.
*  A must-know site for everything anatomy
*  Mnemonics in Anatomy.
*  








af:Anatomie
ar:تشريح
an:Anatomía
ast:Anatomía
az:Anatomiya
be:Анатомія
be-x-old:Анатомія
bn:শারীরস্থান
bs:Anatomija
ca:Anatomia
cv:Анатоми
cs:Anatomie
cy:Anatomeg
da:Anatomi
de:Anatomie
et:Anatoomia
el:Ανατομία
es:Anatomía
eo:Anatomio
ext:Anatomia
eu:Anatomia
fa:کالبدشناسی
fr:Anatomie
fy:Anatomy
gl:Anatomía
ko:해부학
hr:Anatomija
io:Anatomio
id:Anatomi
ia:Anatomia
os:Анатоми
is:Líffærafræði
it:Anatomia
he:אנטומיה
jv:Anatomi
pam:Anatomy
ka:ანატომია
kk:Анатомия
sw:Anatomia
ku:Anatomî
la:Anatomia
lv:Anatomija
lb:Anatomie
lt:Anatomija
hu:Anatómia
mk:Анатомија
arz:تشريح
ms:Anatomi
my:ခန္ဒာဗေဒ
nl:Anatomie
ja:解剖学
no:Anatomi
nn:Anatomi
nrm:Anatonmie
nov:Anatomia
oc:Anatomia
nds:Anatomie
pl:Anatomia
pt:Anatomia
kaa:Anatomiya
ro:Anatomie
qu:Kurku yachay
ru:Анатомия
sah:Анатомия
stq:Anatomie
sq:Anatomia e njeriut
scn:Anatumìa
simple:Anatomy
sk:Anatómia
sl:Anatomija
sr:Анатомија
sh:Anatomija
su:Anatomi
fi:Anatomia
sv:Anatomi
tl:Anatomiya
ta:உடற்கூற்றியல்
te:శరీర నిర్మాణ శాస్త్రము
th:กายวิภาคศาสตร์
tg:Анатомия
tr:Anatomi
uk:Анатомія
ur:تشریح
vi:Giải phẫu học
war:Anatomiya
yi:אנאטאמיע
diq:Anatomiye
bat-smg:Anatuomėjė
zh:解剖学
